# LIF-STDP-SP
## Synaptic reorganization of synchronized neuronal networks with synaptic weight and structural plasticity

Abnormally strong neural synchronization may impair brain function, as observed in several brain disorders. We computationally study how neuronal dynamics, synaptic weights, and network structure co-emerge, in particular, during (de)synchronization processes and how they are affected by external perturbation. To investigate the impact of different types of plasticity mechanisms, we combine a network of excitatory integrate-and-fire neurons with different synaptic weight and/or structural plasticity mechanisms: (i) only spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), (ii) only homeostatic structural plasticity (hSP), i.e., without weight-dependent pruning and without STDP, (iii) a combination of STDP and hSP, i.e., without weight-dependent pruning, and (iv) a combination of STDP and structural plasticity (SP) that includes hSP and weight-dependent pruning. To accommodate the diverse time scales of neuronal firing, STDP, and SP, we introduce a simple stochastic SP model, enabling detailed numerical analyses. With tools from network theory, we reveal that structural reorganization may remarkably enhance the network’s level of synchrony. When weaker contacts are preferentially eliminated by weight-dependent pruning, synchrony is achieved with significantly sparser connections than in randomly structured networks in the STDP-only model. In particular, the strengthening of contacts from neurons with higher natural firing rates to those with lower rates and the weakening of contacts in the opposite direction, followed by selective removal of weak contacts, allows for strong synchrony with fewer connections. This activity-led network reorganization results in the emergence of degree-frequency, degree-degree correlations, and a mixture of degree assortativity. We compare the stimulation-induced desynchronization of synchronized states in the STDP-only model (i) with the desynchronization of models (iii) and (iv). The latter require stimuli of significantly higher intensity to achieve long-term desynchronization. These findings may inform future pre-clinical and clinical studies with invasive or non-invasive stimulus modalities aiming at inducing long-lasting relief of symptoms, e.g., in Parkinson’s disease.
